+++
Categories = ["polly"]
Description = ""
Tags = ["polly"]
date = "2017-03-31"
title = "Work report: March 31"
+++


## Carry over from yesterday
- Came back from LLVM Conf
- Get [polly patch for correctness of data dependences upstreamed](https://reviews.llvm.org/D31386)
- Investigate reductions using may-writes
- Building JIT for Haskell Free monads

## Work today

#### Discussion about Paralleising Haskell
- What should the output of our data dependences look like?
- Considered using Zippers to represent what dependences look like
- Need to "parametrize" zippers
- Can represent this recursively? Will have to see
- Apparently, a related problem is generating FFT code according to Tobias
- Started reading surrounding literature

### Getting Reductions to work with may-writes
- Working on branch [remove-privatization-with-may-reduction](https://github.com/bollu/polly/tree/remove-privatization-with-may-reduction)
- All codegen tests pass
- DependenceInfo tests fail. Probably because we now track reductions as `May-Write`s


### Modelling Reductions as may-writes introduces unwanted dependences
- File: `DependenceInfo/reduction_privatization_deps.ll`

```cpp
 14 ;    void f(int *sum) {
 15 ;      for (int i = 0; i < 1024; i++)
 16 ; S0:    sum[i] = 0;
 17 ;      for (int i = 0; i < 1024; i++)
 18 ;        for (int j = 0; j < 1024; j++)
 19 ; S1:      sum[i + j] += i;
 20 ;      for (int i = 0; i < 1024; i++)
 21 ; S2:    sum[i] = sum[i + 1] * 3;
 22 ;    }
```

##### Original Dependences:
```cpp
  3 ; CHECK:      RAW dependences:
  4 ; CHECK-NEXT:     { Stmt_S0[i0] -> Stmt_S1[o0, i0 - o0] : i0 <= 1023 and 0 <= o0 <= i0; Stmt_S1[i0, i1] -> Stmt_S2    [-1 + i0 + i1] : 0 <= i0 <= 1023 and i1 >= 0 and -i0 < i1 <= 1024 - i0 and i1 <= 1023 }
```

##### New Dependences:

```cpp
	RAW dependences:
		{ Stmt_S0[i0] -> Stmt_S2[-1 + i0] : 0 < i0 <= 1023; Stmt_S0[i0] -> Stmt_S1[o0, i0 - o0] : i0 <= 1023 and 0 <= o0 <= i0; Stmt_S1[i0, i1] -> Stmt_S2[-1 + i0 + i1] : 0 <= i0 <= 1023 and i1 >= 0 and -i0 < i1 <= 1024 - i0 and i1 <= 1023 }
```

- We have `S0 -> S2`. This occurs because we model `S1 -> S1` as may-writes. Since there is `S0 -> S1` and `S1 -> S2`, `S0 -> S2` is also generated.
- This seems non-ideal. But not sure how to fix. Will this affect scheduling? **Ask Tobias**
- Apparently does not matter since they are transitive dependences.

### Progress on may-writes
- Replaced the simple test cases
- Need to check the non-simple ones properly
- in `pattern-matching-based-opts_9.ll`, there are comments in the code that are not being generated which is *super* weird. Figure this out.